3.1 Demand, Supply, and Equilibrium in Markets for Goods and Services - Principles of Microeconomics 3e | OpenStax

5/25/23, 4:49 PM

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain demand, quantity demanded, and the law of demand
Explain supply, quantity supplied, and the law of supply
Identify a demand curve and a supply curve
Explain equilibrium, equilibrium price, and equilibrium quantity
First let’s first focus on what economists mean by demand, what they mean by supply, and then how
demand and supply interact in a market.

Demand for Goods and Services
Economists use the term demand to refer to the amount of some good or service consumers are
willing and able to purchase at each price. Demand is fundamentally based on needs and wants—if
you have no need or want for something, you won't buy it. While a consumer may be able to
diﬀerentiate between a need and a want, from an economist’s perspective they are the same thing.
Demand is also based on ability to pay. If you cannot pay for it, you have no eﬀective demand. By
this definition, a person who does not have a drivers license has no eﬀective demand for a car.
What a buyer pays for a unit of the specific good or service is called price. The total number of units
that consumers would purchase at that price is called the quantity demanded. A rise in price of a
good or service almost always decreases the quantity demanded of that good or service.
Conversely, a fall in price will increase the quantity demanded. When the price of a gallon of gasoline
increases, for example, people look for ways to reduce their consumption by combining several
errands, commuting by carpool or mass transit, or taking weekend or vacation trips closer to home.
Economists call this inverse relationship between price and quantity demanded the law of demand.
The law of demand assumes that all other variables that aﬀect demand (which we explain in the next
module) are held constant.
We can show an example from the market for gasoline in a table or a graph. Economist call a table
that shows the quantity demanded at each price, such as Table 3.1, a demand schedule. In this
case we measure price in dollars per gallon of gasoline. We measure the quantity demanded in
millions of gallons over some time period (for example, per day or per year) and over some
geographic area (like a state or a country). A demand curve shows the relationship between price
and quantity demanded on a graph like Figure 3.2, with quantity on the horizontal axis and the price
per gallon on the vertical axis. (Note that this is an exception to the normal rule in mathematics that
the independent variable (x) goes on the horizontal axis and the dependent variable (y) goes on the
vertical axis. Economics is not math.)
https://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/3-1-demand-supply-and-equilibrium-in-markets-for-goods-and-services

Page 1 of 8

3.1 Demand, Supply, and Equilibrium in Markets for Goods and Services - Principles of Microeconomics 3e | OpenStax

5/25/23, 4:49 PM

Table 3.1 shows the demand schedule and the graph in Figure 3.2 shows the demand curve. These
are two ways to describe the same relationship between price and quantity demanded.
Price (per gallon)

Quantity Demanded (millions of gallons)

$1.00

800

$1.20

700

$1.40

600

$1.60

550

$1.80

500

$2.00

460

$2.20

420

Table 3.1 Price and Quantity Demanded of Gasoline

Figure 3.2 A Demand Curve for Gasoline The demand schedule shows that as price rises, quantity demanded decreases, and vice
https://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/3-1-demand-supply-and-equilibrium-in-markets-for-goods-and-services

Page 2 of 8

3.1 Demand, Supply, and Equilibrium in Markets for Goods and Services - Principles of Microeconomics 3e | OpenStax

5/25/23, 4:49 PM

Figure 3.2 A Demand Curve for Gasoline The demand schedule shows that as price rises, quantity demanded decreases, and vice
versa. We graph these points, and the line connecting them is the demand curve (D). The downward slope of the demand curve again
illustrates the law of demand—the inverse relationship between prices and quantity demanded.

Demand curves will appear somewhat diﬀerent for each product. They may appear relatively steep
or flat, or they may be straight or curved. Nearly all demand curves share the fundamental similarity
that they slope down from left to right. Demand curves embody the law of demand: As the price
increases, the quantity demanded decreases, and conversely, as the price decreases, the quantity
demanded increases.
Confused about these diﬀerent types of demand? Read the next Clear It Up feature.

CLEAR IT UP

Is demand the same as quantity demanded?
In economic terminology, demand is not the same as quantity demanded. When
economists talk about demand, they mean the relationship between a range of prices and
the quantities demanded at those prices, as illustrated by a demand curve or a demand
schedule. When economists talk about quantity demanded, they mean only a certain point
on the demand curve, or one quantity on the demand schedule. In short, demand refers to
the curve and quantity demanded refers to a (specific) point on the curve.

Supply of Goods and Services
When economists talk about supply, they mean the amount of some good or service a producer is
willing to supply at each price. Price is what the producer receives for selling one unit of a good or
service. A rise in price almost always leads to an increase in the quantity supplied of that good or
service, while a fall in price will decrease the quantity supplied. When the price of gasoline rises, for
example, it encourages profit-seeking firms to take several actions: expand exploration for oil
reserves; drill for more oil; invest in more pipelines and oil tankers to bring the oil to plants for
refining into gasoline; build new oil refineries; purchase additional pipelines and trucks to ship the
gasoline to gas stations; and open more gas stations or keep existing gas stations open longer
hours. Economists call this positive relationship between price and quantity supplied—that a higher
price leads to a higher quantity supplied and a lower price leads to a lower quantity supplied—the
law of supply. The law of supply assumes that all other variables that aﬀect supply (to be explained
in the next module) are held constant.
https://openstax.org/books/principles-microeconomics-3e/pages/3-1-demand-supply-and-equilibrium-in-markets-for-goods-and-services

Page 3 of 8

